hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i have another
three-peat guest on today which i'm very
excited about when you have that kind of
history with somebody it's way more fun
stephen cutler welcome to the show
tom it's great to see you again dude for
real um first of all
somehow i missed or maybe this happened
since last we spoke but i can't imagine
you've been twice nominated for a
pulitzer prize
uh that none of that happened yeah
that's happened along the way small
furry prayer and stealing fire were both
nominated by the publishers
for the pulitzer that's crazy
congratulations
amazing
um the new book which i'm super stoked
on and honestly um never have i read a
book that so lined up with my personal
experience where i thought oh my god yes
like somebody's putting words and
science to
this thing that feels so perfectly
aligned with what i have experienced
the book being the art of impossible
in it you talk about something that
really lit me on fire which is this
notion of
the habit of inferiority and i want to
start there and then we'll get into sort
of what you mean by impossible and all
that stuff totally
totally but the habit the habit of
inferiority all right so i wish i i wish
you would have known it was coming
because the habit of inferiority is a
quote from
harvard psychologist william james and
it was it's either in the very first
psychological textbook ever written 1901
or
uh something he wrote right around then
so this is turn of the century and what
he was talking about at the time was the
fact that
most people have second winds right we
have a first one you get tired you
pushed or you got a second when you said
but most of us have no idea we've got a
third wind and a fourth wind and a fifth
win because we never
get used to even pushing into that
second wind let alone beyond and he said
the reason is
that human beings one way or another are
designed to work at much greater speed
and with much greater efficiency but
we've gotten in the habit of inferiority
right we are we've gotten used to
performing
at a mediocre level and that's what we
expect and for
geeky reasons that we can cover in a
second if you want to there's a lot of
neurobiology that basically says your
body is a homostation static system and
when you level set it mediocre it is
going to take extraordinary amounts of
motivation energy to get up to like
super expert right you have to train you
have to fight how you train and train
how you fight to quote the army and that
was the point james was making but he's
also making hey we're all hardwired for
extraordinary if we can get out of the
habit of impurity
so that's another thing in the book that
um
it comes towards the very very end i
think it was the quote of the final
chapter
and it resonated with me in the same way
that this early concept of how we all
habituate ourselves to inferiority was
the nietzsche quote of today is
greatness possible
um what does that quote mean to you
because when i it hit me and i was like
oh my god and then i thought actually
i'm not sure if he means it the way that
i'm taking it which is like
asking yourself that every day to like
be charged up and get after it but so
yes and no so little context around
nietzsche that's in the book nietzsche
was the is considered the first
modern high performance philosopher or
thinker and the reason when i say modern
what i mean is he did his work right
after darwin wrote the origin of species
so suddenly oh wow body evolves over
time shaped by evolution and blah blah
and if you want to understand how to
kind of improve the body or understand
the body you need to understand
evolution
nietzsche said and it was one of a whole
bunch of thinkers who were like hey wait
a minute mind evolves consciousness
evolves for those of us interested in
getting more out of her life he was
interested in becoming the uber match
right the superman he thought it was in
all within all of us i tend to agree
james tended to agree the big difference
nietzsche said hey only 10 of the
population should try this james said no
no um
very good point
maybe true today doubtful his point was
and this was from nietzsche through
about the humanist psychologist so like
young sort of thought this way and then
you get into like carl rogers and maslow
and that's sort of the line so in the
30s and 40s it starts to shift but the
general thinking was nobody really blunt
mommy and culture way too much
and most of us this remember 18th
century victorian era right and freud
especially was like the way to mommy the
way to family the weight of all that
psychosis you're inheriting and the
weight of these really repressive
cultures if you don't like ever all of
them said you have to break with this
stuff completely um i think that's
probably still true today to some
level you have to become your own person
and autonomy really matters for peak
performance etc etc but i don't think
culture is nearly as restrictive but all
that also depends where you were born
what you look like what kind of money
you have etc etc
so wait he was saying that you're so
weighed down by this stuff that you
won't be able to break out of it so
don't even bother and by the way
no he was saying that most people are
not going to be able to pull it off um
he had a formula like as i laid out
nietzsche had a four-step process that
has not really changed he was trying to
follow the biology to becoming the
superman yeah to becoming the superman
and as you said when you read the book
you went
oh my god it's all the stuff the reason
is all this stuff is
we are all biologically shaped by
evolution we are all designed for peak
performance there's a limited set of
tools there there's a lot of them
obviously but they're limited they're
meant to work in an order in a sequence
and that like nietzsche anybody's ever
done this when they read the art of
impossible at any level right you should
read and go oh wow there's a bunch of
stuff that's familiar to me because i'm
doing it i didn't know all this other
stuff was around it to people who
haven't really gone
after super high heart goals it may be
completely new to them and wow there's a
blueprint who knew but for folks who
have gone hard they should have your
experience of oh my god i didn't like
here's all the science here's here's
everything in order i did all this [__]
of course you did there's we all have
the same biology to work with
that that's what i want to talk about so
i've never read nietzsche and forgive me
i'm sure i'm mispronouncing it but it
always feels weird to when you hear
somebody say it to then just immediately
adopt their way of saying it um
so
what is how did he define a superman
like i think of superman the guy in
tights with the cape flying literally
who's right over my shoulder no so
all these people were interested in what
abraham maslow started terming
self-actualization they were interested
in becoming the very best version of
yourself that was possible right and for
nietzsche all that was much of that was
about like creative self-expression also
so when he talks about being the best
version of yourself he's sort of like
you're excellent in a kind of innovative
genius kind of way and the quote i love
from nietzsche is
man is something to be overcome
what have you done today to overcome him
what did he mean by that like your
weaker inferior nature
well
as a so
the point we've been making all along is
the only thing peak performance can be
is figuring out how to get your biology
to work for you rather than against you
but when you're not working with your
biology
it will actually work against you right
and it really will like you know
sort of crush you one way or another and
i'll give you a simple example we can go
into a lot of detail but there are eight
major known causes of depression two of
them are the very familiar ones one of
them is genetics right i don't have i
can't manufacture serotonin and dopamine
take your pick and the other is trauma
obviously the other six are
literally about what happens when you
screw up your intrinsic motivation what
happened right when you're not
when you're not living with passion
purpose regular access to flow all of
the things that essentially the article
is possible are about the tools that
i've worked breaking down
when you use them right the result is
superman when you use them wrong or
don't use them at all if you're not
using the organism the way the organism
is designed to be used the result is
anxiety and depression and we're in the
middle of the largest anxiety and
depression kind of epidemic in the
history of the world so
there's it strikes me that there's a
correlation here
that's interesting so um i want to push
on this idea of of man is to be overcome
and what have you done today to overcome
him so if man is sort of the baseline
biology and i have to understand that
i'm having this biological experience
i've got to work with my biology instead
of against it
let me give you a simple example let's
get out of the theoretical simple
example yeah so
one of the things peak perf so let's
back up and what when we're talking
about tools for peak performance
simplest most powerful tool we have is
our attention is focus
focus actually takes quite a bit of
energy what like if you think about i
got to pay attention to something i'm
not totally interested in you're burning
a lot of calories the brain is two
percent of your body mass 25 percent of
your energy at rest so when you're
expending energy right big energy hog
the brain always wants to conserve
energy this is why when i said oh there
were homeostatic creatures and we get
stuck in mediocrity it's this problem
the brain wants to conserve energy it
doesn't want to burn extra energy if it
doesn't have to because trying to keep
you alive makes sense um
there are a lot of our intrinsic
motivators give us focus for free when
you're curious about something you get
focused for free when you're passionate
about something think about romantic
love when you fall in love with somebody
how much attention you pay to that
person
that like that neurochemically is the
same neural chemicals underneath any
passion right passion of
entrepreneurship the passion doing a
podcast special for writing a book all
of it's the same cocktail
fear is a great one fear is a fantastic
focusing mechanism peak performers and
you i know do this i do this when you're
looking for a new challenge you're like
well what the hell scares me a lot
because i know i'm going to pay a lot of
attention to it and you go in that
direction you can't do that until you've
laid in some other peak performance
skills but once you get good enough to
use fear as a compass basically you get
a tremendous amount of work done
that everybody else has to spend energy
on for free
simply because you've learned to like
process you know handle the fear and you
can trust your ability to step up to the
challenge etc etc all those kinds of
things you're getting tons of work done
for free so when it works what are you
getting for fear focus for free when it
doesn't work what are you getting
anxiety and depression one of the
largest epidemics on earth does that
help
yeah yeah for sure so
going to the core concept of the book
which
definitely feels like a companion piece
to some of the earlier things you've
written especially the rise of superman
you know coming to understand just how
far human potential is out there um and
the early thing that you talked about
you know that fourth and fifth wind um
that's the thing that david goggins said
that always resonated with me when you
just think you're broke and you're spent
your your second wind is dead and gone
you couldn't possibly go anymore you're
only 40 of the way to your actual
abilities
and i that just always hit me so hard
reading the book one i love that you go
into the process and make it seem like
hey you can get better at all of these
different steps but there was one thing
in the beginning that i found really
interesting and
that is that you called it the art of
impossible and not the science of
impossible even though you go ham on the
science in the book i'm guessing or
maybe not but i'm guessing that you at
one point considered that sort of
alternate take on the title why'd you
ultimately
focus the reader on the art of this all
it's a great question
and
despite the fact that every single thing
i did in you know i'm crazy about
evidence-based
performance right like you know at the
flow research collective we're training
about a thousand people a month at this
point
you know uh between it's i've trained i
think at this point over a hundred
thousand people so there's a tremendous
amount besides the narrows how to get
well you can't flow comes with peak
performance right so like all that stuff
together that's a lot of data points is
my point and so
almost everything in the book is based
on that but a couple of things that are
true no matter what
one for example flow triggers you want
more flow there are flow triggers
there's 22 to work with
which triggers you're going to master
and going to be most useful for you
that comes down to your genetics and
your early childhood experience those
things play a major role so i i can say
these are the this is the suite this is
the tool kit figuring out which one
works exactly perfectly for you and they
may change over time that's an art
that's a self-awareness that you're
gonna have to carry into the world
that's not something i can say tom it's
exactly what you do it's based on the
evidence and so i got my staff like i'm
trained as a hardcore investigative
journalist from a time when we had crazy
crazy fact checkers so like i have five
sources for every you know fact i i try
to put in the book everything's been
checked with five other you know what i
mean and i'm just nuts about it and
this scientific method i work with some
of the smartest neuroscientists in the
world and they won't work with me if i'm
not super crazy rigorous and i start
spouting nonsense in public right my
company goes away so like everything is
super i try to tighten it down as pos
but i can't tell you that everything in
the book is completely evidence-based 90
of his evidence-based but there's a
section for example on long-haul
creativity what does it take to sustain
creativity at a really high level over a
long career
there's very little research done on
that in the real world i have spent 10
years investigating experts about it and
i summed it up and gave you the best
stuff i thought in the book that's still
my opinion
and so i couldn't call it the science of
impossible because even though it's
probably 85
there
there's 15 that it's not i don't think
it's truthful and the other side of it
is there's an art to it you have to
bring your own
i can't train you in self-awareness
right i can train you in self-awareness
a little bit but you actually have to
bring that in into the work um yourself
and that self-awareness is an art form
you know the create learning how to be
create creative for example is another
one like i could tell you that one of
the easiest ways to be creative and you
know this is to develop a personal style
i'm not saying go high fashion or i'm
saying style is a choice
make a choice right if you're choosing
to work at microsoft and wear khakis at
a button down because you blend in it
makes you a better manager that's a
choice that's cool you're being a ninja
i like it right but like when you're not
making those choices on a moment by
moment basis you're not trading up
creativity i can tell you that as a fact
the next step in how to do that in your
life i'm now getting into my opinions
and i try
like i try to differentiate and i
couldn't yeah so that's me being a geek
and like just an a reporter and like a
guy trying to like work in neuroscience
um and be credible and respectable and
things like that but that's really why
there was something else in the book
that
um i thought might be part of the answer
certainly rhymes with what you were just
saying which is this concept of
personality doesn't scale biology scales
what did you mean by that
what the long story or the short
um i'll take the long one what whatever
is is most
here's the here
this is cause this is a lesson i learned
the super hard way and also i'll go i'll
go in the middle but
i did not have a normal life by any
stretch of the imagination i was a
working magician by the time i was 10
years old i was doing bar mitzvahs in
weddings i was working in restaurants at
11 years old doing birthday parties all
saturday and all sunday and magicians
are strange weird
people that are like one step out of the
circus and they're con men and jewel
thieves and right and i went from being
a magician to being a punk rocker and
hanging out with bikers and more weird
dangerous kind of people and then i went
into covering
action sports especially in the early
days where like the people i knew
once a month nearly died this was just
how people lived their lives and i
covered science mostly that in that era
field biologist i was an animal geek the
field biologist you want to go to africa
and hang out with lemurs you got to hang
out with field biologists and you think
the actions professional action sport
athletes are dangerous and crazy and
like i remember being in madagascar i
got caught in a lightning storm once and
while running through the mountains back
to this jungle camp and i got back there
and particularly the macarthur genius
award-winning primatologist conversation
conservation there's a dear friend of
mine was there and she's like did you
get struck by lightning i was like what
do you mean did i get struck she's like
yeah it happens there was this guy from
harvard he got struck twice on the way
back once
and i was like the people literally like
i'm hanging out with people who
routinely like they get struck by
lightning twice and still make it back
to camp right and this is just like
another day so my point is my risk
tolerances were totally out of whack i
had
like grown up in incredibly high risk
crazy environments and i started
learning something about peak
performance and flow and look when
anybody learns a little bit about peak
performance about flow all that stuff
you make the same mistake you start
giving advice especially those people
you care about and love and you you're
like oh my god i see so much potential
in you if you only just write and
because
i had was publishing books and i was
writing columns for psychology today and
like i had some street cred they took my
advice
and
one person nearly died two people one
guy put himself in the hospital one
woman almost put herself in the hospital
almost caused a divorce two friends
still won't talk to me and i don't blame
them um
the point is that personality doesn't
scale
things that are foundational to peak
performance what your risk tolerances
are these are genetically hardwired by
dopamine receptors and availability of
the neurochemical dopamine and they're
shaped by early childhood experience you
can change them over long periods of
time like a decade you cannot flip a
switch and do it overnight no matter how
hard you try and it's really dangerous
to do it it's not just that where you
are in the introversion extroversion
scale same thing so there's about 10
critical things to be performance that
are biologically or biologically
hardwired and set up by early childhood
experience that should create your
personality that have huge impacts on
how you should study and learn peak
performance there's another reason why
it's an art and not a science and this
is the same answer the point is
personality doesn't scale so many people
in the coaching peak performance world
they figure out works for them they
teach to other people and they get
disastrous results people can't do it
it's not actual or they try to get it
and they get bad it's for this very
reason we have a foundational idea at
the flurries of collective and in this
book fluid research collective is my
company that studies this stuff um
biology scales because because it's the
very thing that evolution designed to
work for everyone so you find the
foundation and when i say biology i
really mean the neurobio biology what's
going on your brain and your body when
you're performing at your very best
figure out what that core basic
mechanism is and you and train from that
if you try to train from personality or
from psychology people forget that when
you use a term for example like mindset
if i say mindset you probably think i
mean attitude towards life
when scientists say mindset they mean a
very specific thing that happens in the
brain
and it does not mean attitude towards
life there's a whole other thing that we
could talk about that is attitude
towards life they mean a very specific
set of things that are going on in the
brain that we may or may not completely
understand yet but psychology is a
metaphor for neurobiology neurobiology
is mechanism it's not it's not mechanism
we understand a hundred percent but it's
damn we understand it well enough to be
practical so that's what i mean by that
and if you can get down to the mechanism
we are all designed for peak performance
we're hardwired for it by evolution so
that's the biology
that's what i mean by getting your
biology to work for you rather than
against you and by the way again not a
new idea to go back to william james
1901 this isn't the first psychological
textbook ever written he says the great
thing then in all education is to make
your nervous system your ally and not
your enemy
and nervous system is the brain well
let's uh you why do we start where the
book starts right and the because this
is you know my whole thing is like hey
let's follow biology the biology starts
someplace
as i said all like focus and attention
is the gateway to all performance right
you have two big levers you've got focus
and attention and then you've got habit
right and the things you focus your
attention on repeatedly and the actions
you start executing as a result those
become your habits those are your big
lepers right so
if i said earlier the goal is to get
focused for free you have to start with
your big intrinsic or internal
motivators
i always say that you have to start with
motivation because motivation is what
gets you into the game
um and you when you're interested in
that you really now there's a certain
amount of safety and security stuff
that um sort of you have to be able to
pay your bills and have a little left
over right before this stuff starts
working if you're below that line you
have to solve that problem first this
isn't a hundred percent of the time but
as a general rule um
meaning like maslow's pyramid is not a
real thing it's not really a pyramid but
he wasn't particularly wrong about that
for biological reasons if you're not if
you have too much anxiety and fear i
can't make a living i can't pay my bills
how am i going to eat this stuff is
really hard so i'm not i'm assuming that
stuff is taken care of that stuff is
taken care of right and you just a
little bit over uh like my book my bills
are being paid is you're fine you can
start there
the place you want to start is curiosity
because it's the simplest motivational
fuel curiosity neurochemically is a
little bit of the neurochemical
norepinephrine this is you know if you
get a lot of it it's anxiety whoa i'm
paying too much attention to this [__] a
little of it is excitement a little bit
primes your brain for learning you're
interested you know what's going to
happen next kind of thing and you get
dopamine dopamine is talked about as a
reward chemical a pleasure chemical cell
phone dings you know you gotta that's
dopamine that pleasure but it's
basically a it's a focusing chemical but
it also gets us up for the fight it's a
get it gets you ready to take risks or
you know encounter the world or step up
that's what dopeman's all about is
curiosity inborn or can you do things
you can totally cultivate curiosity over
time and the way you literally i mean
it's not that hard you literally have to
notice anything that catches your
attention and give it a couple extra
explore it for one extra beat just start
following your curiosity and the way
the next step is you have to turn
curiosity into passion and the point is
really simple curiosity is a great
motivator right when you're interested
and curious about something just think
about any tv show you kind of oh my god
i didn't know they did ice fishing on
mars look at that honey right like
you're paying a little bit of attention
um and you're not working at it
passion is the next step passion is
literally the intersection of multiple
curiosities
most people don't realize this because
when they when i say tom tell me about a
passionate athlete you're like well
here's lebron james windmills dunking
scowling you know over three defenders
and that's what you think of and you
forget that passion on the front end is
like a little kid in a driveway shooting
balls through a hoop that's what passion
looks like on the front end does not
look like what we think it looks like
and when we compare ourselves to the end
result that's really demotivating and
not going to work very well but
pat curiosity and there's i mean i can i
will i can give you listeners
passionrecipe.com which is the step
process in the book for this i'm giving
it away to anybody for free so don't
just listen to me go there you know we
have a interactive pdf takes you through
all these steps but you can there's the
intersection of multiple curiosities
that's passion neurochemically it's more
dopamine and more uh
nor epinephrine just a lot more the next
step is once you know what you're
passionate about
you want purpose you want us to attach
that passion to a cross greater than
yourself there's lots of peak
performance reasons why but at an
aerocable colombo you start getting more
feel-good powerful drugs oxytocin
endorphins right blah blah and then once
you have your purpose
well then what do you need you need the
freedom to pursue your purpose you need
autonomy that's your next big intrinsic
motivator and once you have oh i've got
i've got the freedom to explore my
purpose you need mastery the skills to
explore that purpose well these are the
big five intrinsic motivators they're
others right um but these are the big
main five they give us the most
neurochemical reward and they're
literally designed to work in that
sequence and if you get them all right
they all do double duties as flow
triggers so flow state of optimal
performance we can go into more depth if
you want but let's for optimal
performance right now
flow follows focus it only shows up when
all of our attention is in the right
here right now so all of flo's triggers
drive attention into the now they do
this by
increasing mostly focusing chemicals
like norepinephrine and dopamine do a
couple other things but that's not
important the point is all these things
curiosity passion purpose autonomy
mastery they're all flow triggers on
their own you'll get a little bit of
like neurochemicals maybe not enough to
put you in the state but when you get
them all in a row
you're doing your work and it's flow 60
70 80 of the time and since the uptick
on performance and flow
is so enormous so huge that not only i
mean along the way anytime you have any
of these things you're getting so much
more work done for free right you're
getting farther faster and by the way
once you get all your intrinsic
motivators right lined up you know
exactly i've got skills for mastery cool
what do you do next you need goals where
the hell am i going and the biology says
you need three sets of goals a mission
statement for your life a series of high
hard goals like i want to be a great
writer it's my mission statement i want
to write a book on cooking i want to
write a book on anime i want to write a
book on batman i want to write a book
right okay i'm just kaiser so zagging
you
sorry um but uh yeah so you know those
are your high hard goals and then
underneath that you need clear goals
what am i going to do today
precisely and then it goes on from there
my point is
that's a system that's the biology and
when i say like you need three levels of
goals we are goal-directed creatures we
have a giant like we're either
sort of shaped by our fears or our goals
if you want to like that's that's sort
of what drive how human beings work at a
really basic level so the biology of
goal setting is amazing like you get
your high hard goals right you can get
an 11 to 25 boost in motivation
simply by setting the right kind of
goals and
that's if you need you're working an
eight-hour day that's your baseline
that's like two free hours of work
give give people the idea around what a
high hard goal is a higher goal is
exactly what i said if my mission
statement purpose is i want to be a
great writer or i want to end world
hunger let's say i want to end world
hunger then my high heart goals is
i want to become a vertical farming
expert i want to
learn everything i can about restorative
sustainable agriculture isn't part of
the definition though that it needs to
be
like
within your
reach but
hard so that you want something not
right out of the mission statement right
mission statement goal that's a big high
hard goals
should be within your reach but they
should be like one to five year
timelines
within your reach is how i think about
them
different people sort of put different
time horizons on them um what this
research shows is one to five years i
find personally with the rate of change
in society and all the other work i do
with peter and all that stuff
i find i can't set high hard goals that
are farther than three years in the
future because so much is changing
that so i that's the window that i i
have started working in recently um but
again you also have to figure out what's
right for you in that one i think um and
yes but it's got to be attainable and
the whole point is um
you have to break them down if it's not
if you can't wrap your head around and
believe it's attainable break it into
chunks until the chunks are attainable
right and those are your high hard goals
part of what i find so intoxicating
about your work and just like the space
of peak performance is
you know going back to where we started
so most people are living a really sort
of shitty version of what their life
could be they're not pushing themselves
they're not setting high hard goals
they're not making big demands of
themselves they're never finding out
what they're actually capable of doing
and so look i get it personality doesn't
scale but so my obsession is with what i
call the physics of being human
what you would refer to as the biology
there are just some things that are true
they are universal and i will
postulate that doing hard things is
universal that there is some wiring in
you to make sure that you went out and
hunted and faced getting gored by
something raising kids like you've got
to be willing to do hard [__] yeah no i
mean like when i say like
when i literally
we are hardwired to go big and not going
big is bad for us like
flat out and we all know this if there's
i always say this at the beginning of
the book and i really believe this is
true
um
i think the only thing harder than
trying to
is the then the sort of the agony of
trying to chase down your dreams is the
agony of not chasing down any of them
it is so much work i kind of figure it's
it's the way if i was being
darker or more blunt or more punk rock i
would say look it sucks here it sucks
here for everybody it doesn't matter
it's called life it's just hard here
it's unpleasant it's gonna be unpleasant
but it's going to suck whether or not
you're trying to be jesus gandhi martin
luther king or you sit in front of the
tv and watch reruns of castle right this
is what makes it suck mr cop
i don't even think it's i don't think it
sucks i just think there's like a i just
think it's heart it is i think life
itself you said the agony of chasing
your goals yeah i mean like
tom you've done really hard [__] in your
life the joy of life is doing hard [__]
the joy of life is realizing that
oh my god what i mean by meaning and
purpose and and then when and we all
know this think back on your life and
what are my favorite things that i've
ever done that mean the matter they're
never [__] that you were given that
accidentally popped into your life that
this stuff you worked really hard for
right like
that for me that list like my marriage
i've been married for 15 years being
married for 15 years it's hard freaking
work you know what i mean and really
that's a dif that's a difficult kind of
one in the book i talk about the
difference between capital i and small i
impossible
marriages are small i impossible to get
right right it's there's no clear gap
bit point between a and b and
statistically right now pretty shitty
odds of success right marriage right now
you're 50
um odds of success
and that's that's that they're a little
better than a lot of the other
impossibles but
yeah the notion of not going after big
things is hard for you really i resonate
with that a lot i think though that
you're right that pursuing that stuff
there is an agony to it there's also an
ecstasy and
the ability to
vacillate to ride the waves of like [__]
this really sucks and i just failed at
something and it mattered and it doesn't
have to be a broken bone but it's like
you know i really went after something
and you've got the high of that and then
you know like take your own context some
of what you've written has been
nominated for pulitzer prize like that's
insanity but then i'm sure there were
other books where you were banging your
head against the wall um and they didn't
go where you wanted them to go and so or
just like a shitty review there are
books that were nominated for pulitzer
prizes that like one of the books that
got nominated for the public surprise is
the hardest thing i've ever done and
every every word shocked
yeah i mean literally i've never had
that experience i didn't know you could
have that experience i had that
experience um now what did it suck
because it was forcing you to confront
your sort of limitations that it was
like everything was just it uh i had it
was uh i was co-writing the book with
somebody that was very difficult to work
with i had an editor
that
did not
trust the subject matter at all like the
book was nominated for a pulitzer by the
publisher but one month before it came
out the editor called me up without my
co-writer on the phone and said if you
don't rewrite this entire book right now
i won't publish it whoa
yeah like it was heavy they hated it
they thought it was wrong they were
scared by the subject matter blah blah
blah how did you deal with that can we
talk about what book i mean there's only
so many books you've written that have
been nominated
yeah so yeah all right we'll look that
up afterwards but i want to i want to
better understand that too much but it
was the problem but so we'll make it
about you i want to know how you deal
with that how do you deal how do you
stay like confident because this is
something everybody can relate to you
believed in something you've put the
effort in the energy but then external
forces are like no no it's crap and in
that moment most people break no no no
so i so one i've written a bunch of
books and i've gotten i come out of when
i come out of the school of journal i'm
a journalist and i that's why i was
trained and editors
are the most merciless
mean
people you've ever they they're
super overworked
they have
narcissistic lunatic bosses often
um who uh start magazines and they have
incredibly high standards and no time
and they are they say some of the
example
i once spent
three four months living in a swamp in
the everglades reporting a story where
the only place to get food was a
really dark evil strip club in the
middle of the swamp that like it was the
only place you could get food and i was
out there for three months reporting
this story i wrote it i turned it in
um my editor called me up and uh the
editor is by the way a very good friend
of mine and still to this day called
he's like steven by the way it took me
three months to report the story and
five months or six months to write it so
i'm nine months in
and um and i'm desperate for the money
by the way at this point i'm really poor
and i need to get paid this story is
going on editor calls me up and he's
like stephen there's just one thing i
don't understand
and i'm thinking oh my god i'm so damn
good like one thing cool what do you got
man
hit me he's like yeah man
every [__] word you wrote
and
no [__] no kidding and uh like start
over and so what i've learned all along
is the following
it's a general rule if you think the
person you're talking to
has an opinion that is
at all of merit if you think they're you
know
and i think most people's general are
are fairly smart especially
willing to give them the benefit of
doubt on a lot of this stuff so
what i always say is usually when
somebody tells you something is shitty
the thing they're telling you is shitty
like what they're pointing at they're
probably wrong about
but the fact that it is creating this
something's wrong
and it's making them you trust that
shitty feeling you don't trust
why they think it's shitty is what i've
learned so um when the editor came to me
and said reread it she wasn't wrong we
were it was a very hard book besides the
fact that we were butting heads and we
had just different ideas about where it
should go and how it should go it was
trying to do a lot of things i was
trying to write um i always try to write
about my head but this one was i was
writing farther above my head meaning
the fact density in a normal book of
mine is one to two facts per sentence or
paragraph this was like sometimes three
to four facts a sentence that's a harder
thing to do right and not lose your
readers not bore people so it's
technically challenging and we had not
taken it to the level of
it was all there
at but it wasn't fun yet and that's
actually like often the final thing you
have to do you have to get it all there
in the right order and it still doesn't
sing and then you do one final
massive polish that is usually you think
you've got a 10 polish and you've got
like a 40 polish and it's herculean and
impossible and you you know it's awful
but that's what it needs and when you do
it you're like oh crap
this is right like this is right and um
we got it right i mean it it worked and
um
the editor has yet to apologize by the
way i like i was we were nominated for a
bullet so it's an international
bestseller you'd think i'm gonna be like
hey i was sorry about that maybe i was
wrong but
yeah people definitely have a hard time
with that
um do you have like uh i only take books
where i'm really confident in the
subject matter or
because you know it's so easy to be
swayed by external forces when you don't
have a strong sense of what something is
and writing is such a sort of naked art
form where you're really putting
yourself out there to get to get knocked
around and i'm just wondering you know
for if you think of a sort of beginning
writer listening to this what is how do
you create that stability of the idea to
weather the storms where you can go okay
cool there's a problem they're probably
wrong about how to fix it
but i know what this idea is i have the
confidence to to keep going and i'll
further contextualize this
you've often said that in the beginning
you may only get three to five hundred
words a day but by the end when you've
really found the book you're at like
1400 words a day
so obviously there's a phase where the
idea is quite delicate and like maybe
you haven't quite found it what advice
you have for people that you know
they're creating something artistically
and it is very possible that other
people will knock them off what they're
trying to do
um
so
i mean the really long answer to that
question is found in flow for writers
which is the whole right the class i
built about this so there's no short
answer but i'll give you some stuff that
we talk about in the art of impossible
that applies to the creativity in
general and definitely book writing
that's some high percentage probably
over 50 of writer's block of any kind of
creative block is you don't know your
starts and your endings earlier i said
we are goal directed machines
i'm not like that's not a figure of
speech the brain has a built-in pattern
recognition system it links ideas
together automatically if you give it a
place to start and you know where you're
going
if you can pay attention you will get
like it will find all the steps in
between
goal setting
is
both about driving motivation and
filtering reality our goals filter our
reality when you don't have goal set
property you will not notice the op the
opportunities won't like you literally
won't see them for neurobiological
reasons we can go into
um
but it works the same with creativity
right you've got to know where you're
going think about like
the simple example the one that
everybody can kind of get is we've all
ridden a bike when you ride a bike you
don't really
steer for where you are you look
30 feet ahead right mountain bikers are
taught to look 30 feet down the trailer
when your mom taught you how to ride a
bike look in front of you don't look
down at your tires right because we get
we're literally as biological beings
built to go where we look right if
you've ever surfed and tried to surf a
tube you cannot surf a tube everything
is moving way too fast you have to look
yourself through the tube you pull into
that wave you peg your eyes to the end
of a hole and that's how you get there
when you walk a balance beam or a slack
line you put your eyes on the end of the
thing and that's how you get there you
can't actually steer consciously we
steer with
visually by where we go this is why
visualization as
a performance technique actually works
same same system these are all parts of
the same system
and
knowing your ending so my point on this
is i have an outline
i um
i have a general belief that i am not
all that special meaning if i'm really
interested in something
bunch of other people probably are too
that's just my general thesis is like if
i find this interesting
i'm not all that special a bunch of
other people are too so i if i can
accurately communicate what it is that i
find so damn fascinating and i'm willing
to give 10 years of my life to it i
think there's a whole bunch of other
people will go oh yeah that's cool i
want to i'll read about that you know
what i'm in so that's the my modus
operand i trust
my instincts and i've had the advantage
of
i've had been having instincts like that
in public
for decades i would pitch editors five
ideas at a time they would say four
sucks do this one right and over and
over and over and over again so i've you
know i've gotten i trust i trust at this
point you know what i mean at a certain
point when you move transition from
being a journalist to being a book
writer you just sort of have to go okay
i god i hope people like my words
because like i'm trying to turn words
into money that's the sort of the job
you know what i mean like we can make it
all fancy and call it art and all but
like at a really basic level i'm turning
words into money and that only works if
i is if i write compelling interesting
words and at a certain point you have to
just trust it there's something that you
in there about the notion of turning
words into money that reminded me of
what we were talking about right before
we started rolling which is this idea
that your early 20s is this utterly
fascinating period in your life and i
think what i'm cueing off of is is sort
of how you end up in that position where
you're turning words into money um and
you were talking about
antimatter a sort of visual arts
collective that you were a part of or
started um in your early 20s and living
in like a super dicey area in san
francisco
what is it about those sort of early
formative years um i i think they're
incredibly important to the artist
somebody that will will become i don't
know maybe you don't think that or maybe
you do but
do you think anything is special about
that period and if so what is it
uh i don't know if anything is more
like
there's something special about that
period there's really something special
about your 30s and your 40 i mean like
there's adult development sort of
follows up right a a set set of patterns
but i do think you're right in that
um
i was around a lot of people
who
um
you had to be a little bit of a dreamer
i was around like artists and
entrepreneurs
essentially and
both are you know people who are sorted
chasing the impossible a little bit and
by the way action sport athletes who
suddenly decided they were going to try
to get paid for action sports like
nobody in the history of the world had
ever gotten paid as an action sport
athlete right they didn't have sponsors
we weren't even like full-fledged
members of society right skateboarding
was a crime and like you know what i
mean like people forget how punk rock
that stuff really was but
it was it was not really you know surf
bombs ski bombs these were not you know
it changed after the x games and the
grabby games and people started to get
sponsors but i was part of the
generation that sort of solved that
puzzle and figured that out so you all
the people around me were sort of like
betting on themselves against really
impossible odds
and often in the face of culture and
society to get back to the nietzsche
idea we started with right um
that's what really i think that's one of
the things that shaped me is you know as
i said my level of risk tolerance but my
level of like what's possible in this
life i always say that like
i was living in and around [__] valley
in the early 90s i was 22 23 like after
anti-matter right and coming out of that
period when i was living at the largest
performance in video
house and people were getting famous
like you know people getting shows at
major
um
galleries and then made museums and
things like that so like i was watching
people really succeed um but even with
the action sport athletes like you have
to understand that it's like you go out
drinking with your friends on you know
it's friday night you go drinking with
your friends everybody gets hammered
every does the same stupid [__] we all
go home and you wake up in the morning
and those same friends do something
that's never been done before in the
history of humanity and for all recorded
history we believed was impossible
that's a very
weird thing right peter diamandis was
one of my close friends he wanted to
unlock the space frontier and it seemed
really possible the first guy who
invented the flying uh it was actually a
flying motorcycle deja molnar
he was a friend i was the first guy who
ever saw the blueprints he like barged
in my apartment in l.a one time and like
spread him out he's like look i've
invented a flying motorcycle and you're
like what the [__] are you talking
you've been better that turns out yeah
actually so this was that kind of world
and it was it was very hard to figure
out where like what's possible where are
the limits like we're not supposed to be
we're supposed to be punk rockers we're
supposed to be dead before we're 30.
like that was the crowd we're not
supposed to be redefining the limits of
human possibility
and sort of this was also the 90s so you
got to remember that like the weird punk
rockers took over music took over
magazines like all of a sudden like this
really weird group of outsiders um we
weren't charged right like nirvana
released an album a couple other things
happened
and
you know suddenly you could self-publish
you couldn't self-publish but the tools
of publishing were no longer a
million-dollar tools they were things
that people could afford and suddenly
you could
challenge big major magazines you didn't
have to right and i was part of all of
that so the possibility space
um
was really open so the 20s were amazing
that way was very hard though
is like everybody else the 30s are when
reality said it sets in always across
the board so like
i think one of the big differences
between me and almost everybody else i
knew is um
i just never gave up on that idea like i
think everybody a lot of people i knew i
watched them making choices
and
i was like well that's it's cool that
you bought that great house but now
you've got a mortgage and with a
mortgage you're locked into certain
decisions or
now you're you're married and have a
baby and now you're locked into certain
decisions
and that may be cool but it is also
limiting you know peak performance stuff
and i mean you know
yeah this is getting into why i think
the the 20s or the early 20s especially
such a magical period you talk in the
book
really profoundly about creativity and
the things that sort of lead to
creativity and one of the things you
talk about is like the ability to do
pattern recognition from sort of oblique
angles but that if you want to recognize
those patterns you must encounter a lot
of patterns so in your early 20s being
poor is okay first of all people don't
have a lot of the responsibilities
they're not tied down by kids they're
not tied down by a mortgage and they
don't have all the preconceived notions
a lot of the things that you think are
impossible are things that you learn
over time that are impossible because
you watch somebody else fall you get
hurt you break a bone the world tells
you you know that that's not gonna work
and in your early 20s you're sort of
still in that phase where you haven't
given up like you're talking about you
don't have the huge responsibilities you
haven't broken all the bones yet and so
people will in that sort of drinking in
the world
um to
begin to have the patterns that they
will recognize later that they'll
monetize right like looking back at
people in their early 20s they just seem
like a chaotic mess like it it is i do
not romanticize it right they look like
a [__] mess but
when i was in it i remember thinking
that i was as old as i was ever going to
be that i had everything figured out the
world just seemed incredibly open oh god
somebody there's a quote please tell me
you know who said this it's something
like when you're young the world is
literally infinite you could become
anything but then at some point like it
starts narrowing down until you are a
very specific person well so you know
the quote we you started with the habit
of inferiority the james quote in the
book i say look there's a modern version
written by the screenwriter charlie
kaufman that opens confessions of a
dangerous mind um the movie that george
clooney made the chuck berry story which
to me
is one of the more devastating
heartbreaking quotes in the world which
is when you're young your potential is
infinite you could be anything really
you could be einstein you might be
dimaggio and then you get to an age when
what you might be gives way to what you
have been
you weren't einstein you weren't
anything that's a bad moment
now some people hear that and they're
like screw you stephen man i'm just
trying to be right i'm just trying to
get through monday um i don't need to
become anything i and okay
that's like sure and in that case go
read art impossible to make monday
easier for you you know what i mean but
like i don't believe you honestly like
most people came to do something and if
they knew there was a blueprint and they
knew like you know hey wait this is
really within the realm of possibility
for me they'd go for it and that's what
i think is true well we're speaking of
devastating quotes tied to this idea of
the world being more infinite when
you're young there is a quote that
haunts me i think about it not every day
but
damn it it's close
genius is a young man's game
and i
hate that quote because as a late
bloomer i i just don't want it to be
true right i want to feel like my best
friend i think i think that's totally
crack that it's crap and um i can by the
way so there's a great book that'll like
one book that'll solve your problem go
read uh the wisdom paradox by a
neuroscientist named alcanon goldberg
and funny
greatest name ever
goldberg he's israeli but now teaches
nyu but
this is a little before your time i
think but like interesting so the book's
about what is wisdom but he set out to
solve this really weird puzzle
reagan when reagan was president his
second term but when after his
presidency was very clear about i had
alzheimer's right and so he was
for at least two if not three years was
governing the most powerful nation on
earth
with alzheimer's and so elkanah asked
himself how is this even possible like
sure people were helping you know what i
mean but like he was still in charge and
he wanted to know how was this from a
biological how is this possible and so
he wrote a book about where what's the
neurobiology of wisdom and it is and
where it comes from and i don't like
geniuses they stop when they say jesus
you got to give us the punchline of of
the wisdom paradox so where does it go
from
pattern recognition interesting you you
i mean you it's if if you can lay in the
brain
it works by associations right it makes
it so so if you can
fill it with enough rich connections and
associations and habituate them his
point with reagan is the guy had
habituated so many high level programs
that he could execute automatically that
literally like he could like oh it's
statesman mode time cooling clicking
it's just automatic and you've seen this
you've been around
it's fairly common with certain breed of
thought leaders where they've just
they've been in front of the microphone
too long and they like you ask a
question they just slap into like i'm
going to give you robo answer right now
what i call the loop
right the loop so you've seen that um
reagan just had more loops and higher
level loops than a lot of people because
of you know
his level of experience that but that
was all kanan's point but this is how we
all learn and that doesn't change right
genius is cumulative and they always
like when you actually look at um some
of the really good books on creative
genius and where it comes from and what
do we know and sort of this is
tangential to that idea i talked about
long-haul creativity so there's a lot of
this work that's been done
they always point out geniuses have a
couple things in common one is they
produce an enormous amount of [__]
right like just stuff you just produce a
lot and
seventy percent of it is crap but thirty
percent is freaking genius and you know
right that's a commonality throughout
history shows up everywhere
so while quality is there there's also a
quantity to it and as you know quantity
increases over time what they were
talking about though was the
calcification of imagination that does
occur
as you get older and that's that's real
for a lot of neurobiological ways but
it's also completely defeatable like you
don't have to get stuck that way in fact
the art of impossible like the stuff on
creativity and long-haul creativity is
essentially a formula for hey here's how
you keep developing your creative
problem-solving syllabus don't calcify
but you know
break that down for me because one that
term is magical the calcification of
imagination is very evocative
how do we avoid that
well i mean you know easy way
hire a lot of people across a bunch of
different ages or work with people from
a bunch of different ages and a bunch of
different cultures why would that work
because
what happens as so
as we get older um we gain more and more
and more expertise on sort of how we
like to live
how who we are how we like to live and
what we know
in the world and
we take in
less new information because we think we
have all the right ideas and that's fine
there's some great expertise there but
you can that's not how imagination
requires novelty
creativity is a recombinatory process we
can go deeper but at a simple level your
brain notices something new
it finds something old it connects the
dots and it bursts something completely
novel that's how creativity works and
that middle step is pattern recognition
right but you've got to feed it
something novel so if you're not
taking in the novel you've got a problem
and if
you're getting older
and
all you the people around you are your
age and look like you
you have no access to novelty also even
made worse by the fact that people
stopped reading novels
novels are novel like they literally
give you somebody else's perspective
they're designed to shift your head
sideways and say hey man your view of
reality might be totally accurate but
somebody else is right here they got
another view it's totally different and
they're they think theirs is totally
accurate and i don't know who's right
but just so you know right and i like i
i read novels for that reason and i also
like to have people who are a lot older
than me you know working in my company
and people who are a lot younger than me
working in my company um i i like to
surround myself
with smart people who disagree with me
and you know and i like you know i
always say as a journalist you're taught
that the best room to be in is the room
where you're the dumbest
how do you navigate that though so this
is the um the abraham lincoln idea of a
team of rivals which i'm obsessed with
i'm the same as you i want people to
disagree but it is not easy to
orchestrate that disagreement without it
turning into dysfunction so do you have
any insights there yeah i i so um
let us say that the art of impossible is
a book that is very much focused on
individual
peak performance there is some team
stuff in there you're getting into
leadership and team questions and i have
knowledge i don't necessarily know if i
have expertise and i don't mind you
popping off i'm just like
this is just stuff i man
i don't know i mean like i don't like
i'll give you a really freaking simple
example from the past couple of days
my wife who i love to death and is
amazing and she like she's doing her job
when she says this she's like look man
you think you're really funny and you
are but you got to be careful because
you pay people and the people you're
editing with
like are they laughing because it's
funny or are they laughing because
you're paying them and until you know
be careful with this stuff because blah
blah she's not wrong about that stuff
and i was always talking to literally
like a bunch of people i'm working on a
big project with on my staff about this
very thing we're creating content
together and i was like look you guys
are laughing and i can't tell if you're
laughing because
this is funny or you're laughing because
you think you have to be laughing or
you're laughing because you can't
believe that stephen would consider
doing this he must be out of his [__]
mind right like it's one of the three
and i was literally talking about his
stuff and i was like i don't know which
one to trust and i've had my wife wasn't
saying anything i wasn't already feeling
you know what i mean she was like hey
man the reason this is irking you is
because of and i mean i like the fact i
think i work with some of the greatest
people in the world who are my friends
but it doesn't change the fact that like
60 people work for me and
you know i'm excited that they get to do
what they've always wanted to do for a
living and i can sort of make help make
that happen but it's a fair point and i
don't know how that's a difficult
challenge for me to solve i'm not sure
what the answer is to that particular
one is my is my answer that's as honest
i could i can be because i really don't
like this is live and learn when it
comes to like team management stuff
right and leadership stuff for me
yeah it's i mean i think it's live and
learn for everybody that's in the middle
of it but whenever you own a company
it's like well you have to do something
you've got to be making decisions every
day and
getting people to talk to power is
brutally difficult it's one of the
things that i actively hire for i'm
looking for people yeah just in the
interview process
i mean i like to hire ex-journalists
for a lot of different reasons i
personally believe
that if you can write a 10 000 word
article
you have most of the skills you need to
succeed in business and almost
everything else i can teach you
depending on where where i need to push
you because there's so much that sort of
comes baked into that particular one but
journalists
have some of that stuff built in as well
like they are i was paid a i was an old
punk rocker right
b i was a magician and like magicians i
was around the best in the world like
literally like you'd hang out a magic
store and the biggest names in the world
the guys who were on broadway or in
vegas we're making millions of dollars
at it would come in and stand around and
do card tricks with the 13 year old 12
year old kids like that how long did you
stay
practicing
i started working when i was 10
and i sort of started to phase out
around the time i was 17
because i started to realize that
honestly to be great at magic and i
don't like to do anything that i can't
be great at you have to like lying to
people ultimately you have to like that
you like conning people or fooling
people like that has to be part of the
thrill for you
getting over in that way and that's
actually not a thrill for me like it
wasn't natural and it was too
i
i was you know i didn't it turns out
that i like i liked part of the equation
it was the same reason like i played
around kind of a lot of theater it did a
lot more theater than most people ever
do but again it wasn't like it wasn't
the right fit for me i ended up you know
in a performance in art video gallery
because i thought maybe performance art
would work and it didn't like it turns
out like when i wrote my first book and
got up on stage and started talking
about like the ideas that i was actually
interested in writing about that was the
right fit and i was like oh this one
fits i can do this thing those other
things work quite right even though the
urges were pointing in the same
direction the fit was wrong what was
some of the like craziest performance
art that either you did or you've seen
done
though
hard to say i mean i was so like yeah
this is the same crowd that created
burning i mean the survival research
labs
shows like the one that was under the
bay bridge where they like afterwards i
don't even think they're allowed to
perform in california anymore i think
like um you got to remember that like
long before they were robo wars or
birding man or any of that stuff there
was this group of crazy artists led by a
guy named mark pauline
um
who had nine fingers because he blew one
off in a
crazy accident doing building they would
build like
sonic death cannons out of jet engines
that fired
sonic air and they would build 90 foot
flame throwers and hundred foot robots
that would do battle underneath the bay
bridge there was literally three places
in the world they could perform and you
had to sign waivers and take your life
in your hands to you can look up
survival research labs online but like
they were huge these were a lot of the
people who ended up building burning man
all the art cars and all that stuff same
this is the dna this is where it came
from and they were all sort of like mad
rocket science
geniuses
um coming sort of out of
southern california orange county rocket
science aerospace world and like started
to use that knowledge to do things like
build surfboards and then what do they
do in their free time they build death
robots that you know what i mean that
was sort of the culture but like
if you look early action sports was a
lot of crossover out of the aerospace
community where do you think those
materials came from for surfboards and
skis and like so there was this weird
you know and this was all san francisco
so there was a lot of proto silicon
valley early v this was the world world
of early vr
with jared lenair and though you know
that was that that kind of world
um so survival research labs i saw
scosie fetish which was mini survival
research labs they played in our living
room or at antimatter which was like
having their opponent
no they were uh they were
a they were a
noise band
that played things like chainsaws and
oil drums and
destroying a
car with a sledgehammer
um and maybe a little guitar um et
cetera et cetera while they had death
robots fighting it out on stage with
them um gwar came out of this whole same
scene if you've ever heard of the metal
band of war but this
noise band is well outside of anything
that i've experienced with i don't
believe that because there's a there's
actually crossover with like early anime
like there's some of the stuff you're
into
it's coming coming out
out of japan crossed into some of the
early noise industrial i mean this was
nine inch nails came out of this sit
like later on in this progression
marilyn manson is a couple like same
lenny is just a bunch of steps down
those guys i dig but there's definitely
melodies and things i'm far more drawn
to the ones that sound like songs and
not the ones that sound like a piece of
equipment breaking by i have to tell you
the spectacle was amazing
the spectacle was astounding
there were people i knew who who like
would listen to it as if it was like
music or something like i was like this
dude is like torturing live animals is
what it sounds like and that's not like
i don't want to listen i want to watch
it because the spectacle is amazing and
i can't like there was really amazing
creativity in it like it sounds like but
it was really well done and well
orchestrated and thought out and
interesting um at the time also like
when you're 18 19 20 21 22 um
and you haven't seen as much spectacle
and in the world before like you gotta
also remember
i didn't grow up in a world with the
internet i didn't grow up in the world
with i was grabbing cleveland before
there was cable tv there you know what i
mean we had three channels new york
culture would sort of arrive in
cleveland like eight months late or
eight months before it was like bands
would show up show up to play where i
grew up in cleveland um i saw everybody
in like these you two would come to play
a giant you know american tour and they
would come to cleveland first because
like who cares is freaking cleveland so
we'll warm up there we'll screw it all
up and then we'll go to the rest of the
world so we either got culture like a
couple years later where we got bad
culture like early because people wanted
to test the market
that's hilarious
when i think about some of the sort of
ultra-creative out-of-the-box thinkers
that you're describing here people that
make big battle robots before it's a
thing people that are turning chainsaws
and flamethrowers into music
ish
it reminds me of the part in the book
where you actually say actually maybe
what you need is to think inside the box
you put forward some
counter-intuitive ideas around you know
what creativity is and how to hack
creativity
um
how do we hack creativity yeah we you we
covered that so i earlier i said
know your starts and your endings right
it's a form of this
there is the reason the blank page is so
awful is we're not we're actually
built to be creative sort of inside the
box it's much better we're much freer
for a a lot of ways um the brain just
rear with restrictions with free or with
restrictions it's easier to be creative
but that takes a little while
because it gives us the the light at the
end of the surf tube to look at and
point our eyes at is that like how does
that generate freedom it limits the
possibility space the possibility space
is too big when you can go anywhere
it you can literally go anywhere what
are my choices how do i pick right when
i have
i used to
you like it's like when i choose to
start a chapter i used to get really i
care more about the first line than i
care about anything because it's where
like it's my start and i've got to get
it right but i that used to [__] me
and then i realized that like no just
start like i'll give you a simple
example
i write in layers
my first pass is literally
who what where why when who what where i
went my second paths are all the sort of
like plot points that have to come so
who well where does he live and what
colors
is hair and what is it right like though
that kind of [__] and the art gets added
on last and i and i do you're talking
about when writing fiction or not
writing anything anything you've ever
read of mine for the past 20 years or so
i write in layers
and i do that because the limit of the
who what where why
um is it once it's in place
then the art can be free if i try to
start with a style and i want to start
with the art and the flair and the
whatever
i am making it i'm locking myself into a
position that i don't know if i want to
be locked into like if i want to
communicate getting what i need to
communicate out first before i layer the
art in works better for me because the
art shackles it completely down to one
way i don't know if i'm making any sense
there but there's there's a tremendous
amount of uh
research that basically says you know if
i say tom create a funny sketch for me
go you got two minutes
you're gonna get stuck but if i'm like
tom okay i need i need a funny sketch i
need
uh superman meets wonder woman in a
bayou cantina and what's the
talk right suddenly you can actually and
your brain is already like i can just
look at you and i know you've got like
one or two superman meets lava and a
cantina
ideas floating around your head i gave
you some pre-existing limits
you know how to put these things
together in a way that's kind of funny
it's automatic-ish your brain is a
pattern recognition system and will do
that but if you say if i just say dude
just be funny be be funny it's gonna be
about superheroes
you're like what i don't there are so
many yeah that's right when people
invite me to give talks i'm always
you know give me the theme of the event
uh have people ask me questions like
give me some sort of prompt and you
actually quote a jazz musician i forget
who in the book is saying you can't
impossible off of nothing
yeah you can't improv off of nothing and
it's he's i think he's totally right
yeah that that makes a lot of sense to
me
it's the same thing as
it's the same thing with like
so i like think about football is a
really great example because
for for play football plays last about
seven to eight seconds nine seconds um
and for the first six seconds or so
you have a job to do
right bill belichick do your job well
that job actually is going to last about
six seconds and then if the play is
still going it's because either somebody
doing something good or the play has
broken down and you're freestyling and
you've got four seconds to be a creative
genius and that's what makes football so
challenging is because you have to play
color completely with little in the
lines for the first half of the play and
then be an improvisational genius for
the second half of the play and that's a
really like that's a really strange
thing for people to learn how to do it's
really hard and it's also it's a very
it's a very flowy game
but only if you get enough repetitions
and being that it's contact sport it's
super violent it's hard right like it's
it's got a bunch of really interesting
limiting factors that make football a
very interesting sort of like i like
watching it for like
the creative puzzle solving of like
they're trying to create lim and what
when a
coach is creating plays
he's creating limits he's saying look
this is the play this what we're going
to try to do but if it doesn't work i'm
setting it up these are the bounds and
you freestyle inside of it because if
you freestyle outside of it the
quarterback is gonna have no freaking
clue where to throw the ball but i'm
giving you limits freestyle inside these
limits and we can find you kind of thing
that's an example that everybody can
kind of wrap their head or all the males
who like but or all the people who like
football um sorry i grew up in a world
where women didn't really like football
now women like football and i love that
that makes me a lot happier yeah no joke
uh i want to talk about creativity how
we expand it
drugs and how it plays in in the book
you give an example which of course i
thought the punch line would be that
drinking messes up your creativity but
you actually give an example of there is
like a sweet spot right below or at
least this is what they tested right
below the legal limit
and they were able to solve word puzzles
faster and with more answers than people
who
were sober which i was very surprised
and how far does that extrapolate
so
uh
with
which question you want first do i you
want booze or creativity first uh well
in the book you were talking about booze
as it ties to creativity so what i'm
trying to figure out is
do you want me to answer the booze
question first to the creativity
question first go go with creativity
okay so um
one thing that's worth knowing
the part of the brain that finds farther
flung associations between ideas appears
to be
uh the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex
don't worry about that's just a fancy
name for like this is where it is right
in the brain that's what it and what it
looks like but i'll ignore that what we
know is that
when the more anxiety in your system the
more logical and linear your brain wants
to be
and the extreme example that everybody
is going to go oh wow i didn't think of
it that way it's fight or flight when
you're facing a really big challenge
your brain says no no no you should not
have lots of options you'll die we're
going to give you two you can fight or
you can run right those are your choices
you can actually freeze there's three
but like fight freeze and flee is less
sexy than fight or flight so people
leave it out but like literally that's
that's not just at the extreme
that's every step along the way so the
more fear the more anxiety
the less creativity your brain wants
logical linear safe solutions
the less anxiety
the and and and booze uh low
they didn't get people drunk they took
them right up i think it was right below
the legal limit is where they got him a
little a little tipsy um
is um first of all you get dopamine from
booze so that's a feel-good drug so
you're in a better mood we know like
being in a good mood
is one of the best hacks for creativity
right for sure and it's this mechanism
when you're in a good mood you feel safe
and secure so your brain will find
farther flung connections between ideas
simpler way to do it by the way is look
at a wide vista
and try to look at the corners of your
eyes
your brain goes
so when you're anxious you focus really
intently so when you're looking at your
peripheral vision your brain goes oh
well focus isn't really intense you must
be calm and it actually activates your
parasympathetic nervous system it calms
you down um so it's a very if you're
looking to calm yourself down really
fast
looking out of your peripheral vision
seems to be one way to do it um this is
not my work this is dr andrew huberman's
work at stanford we do some work with
him this is this is stuff incredible
dude i love that guy yeah andrew's great
um
so uh
same thing so
one booze puts you in a in a better mood
and two so dopamine
neurochemicals
are the brain communicates in two ways
right electrical signals chemical
signals
and um
neurochemicals are multi-tools right
they do lots of different jobs in the
brain dopamine amplifies focus that's
one of the things it does it also
rewards any behavior that like has a
survival value but another thing it does
is it
tunes signal the noise ratios which is a
fancy way of saying it amplifies pattern
recognition so when we have dopamine in
our system we find more connections
between stuff so i'll give you a simple
example one of the things that happens
we get dopamine from insights if you
ever do a sudoku or a crossfit puzzle
get an answer right that little rush of
pleasure you get that's dopamine you
ever notice that you get like three or
four answers right in a row it's because
dopamine
you get a russia dopamine from getting
one answer together pattern recognition
and then because dopamine amplifies
pattern recognition you get a bunch of
answers in a row this is why creative
ideas spiral well one idea leads to the
next at least the next leads to the next
right this is the mechanism underneath
all of that
so um and by the way
turn up the dopamine too much you have
schizophrenia you start finding patterns
where there aren't connections you get
concerns that's interesting right so
this is peter bruegger's work in
switzerland beautiful study crazy study
you'll love this
took a bunch of uh
people who are he called them true
believers these are people who believe
in conspiracy theories and gods ghosts
demons a lot of spiritual right that
group then he took a bunch of skeptics
and then he took a bunch of faces
scrambled some
and kept others as real faces so you
could get like your nose my eyes and her
ears pushed together it looks like a
real face but it's not or you get a real
face and they started showing them these
clusters of people
the people
who
were the conspiracy buffs always saw
more
real faces
where the skeptics said oh no that's
fake that's real they redid the
experiment and they gave people dopamine
they gave the skeptics l-dopa which is a
parkinson's drug it increases the amount
of domain and some of the skeptics were
saying oh no that's a real face that's a
real face it's a real face yeah so
dopamine this is why also like
all that when they give l-dopa to people
you can suddenly spontaneously develop
gambling addictions yes i've heard about
that that's a love of patterns that's
about patterns and reward whatever but
you can also um this happens fairly
frequently people have like second third
creative careers like they get on el
dopa for parkinson's and they have like
this creative flowering
because they're saying right so it's a
hybrid it's a sort of okay okay okay
hold on so why
uh everybody's gonna tell you to do
psychedelics if you want to increase
your creativity i micro dose psilocybin
it did [__] all for me it was not
interesting in the slightest
um
why why don't people talk about taking
ill delta i'm literally going to get off
this call and go find a supplier
i mean
the thing is first of all there's you
can get it naturally um better but you
know or i mean if you uh smoke sativa or
any uh any of the marijuana's just
nothing for me
nothing
like i'm not saying um
you're not your experience is real i'm
not doubting your experience
this is interesting because like i mean
most people i mean i'm not saying it's
creativity you can use i hate like tom
i'm not a fan of micro dosing and i'm
not i wrote stealing fire i i
pointed out that yes there's a long
history of people using psychedelics for
creativity at the flow research
collective
we are interested in psychological and
physiological interventions and not
technological or pharmacological and
people ask me why all the time and i'm
like look i can if i was dramatic i
would say well back when i was a
journalist on five separate occasions i
was shot at and at no point when
somebody was shooting at me was i like
excuse me sir would you please put that
ak-47 down while i put this eg headset
on and train my brain waves in alpha so
i can dodge your bullets right that [__]
doesn't happen or when the boss says hey
tom get in here i need the presentation
we're gonna do next week i need it now
and i need to do it for my boss and her
boss and his boss and the future of the
world depends on it you don't have time
for a substance or the much more
familiar example hey honey can i talk to
you for a minute
right like you don't get to say oh like
let me hold on let me get jiggy with all
this tech and these substances and then
yeah right like that's not how reality
works
i want tools that can work under any
circumstances that are reliable and
repeatable and i'm not um to say nothing
of the fact that like psychic and i've
done more psychedelics than you know we
talked about this last time we were on
the air i've got a long i did a lot of
psychedelics in my 20s um and i'll still
do them every now and again for fun um
but i like i think drugs are fun i think
they can be fun and a good vacation
every now and again i don't think
they're worth a damn for insight people
a lot of people think you can get
creativity and insight and i'm not
saying other people can't
i certainly can't it's never worked that
way i've learned one or two things that
may or may not be true about the
universe
and that's what i've learned and i've
you know i've taken you know more
psychedelics than than
most people ever go near um
i um and okay interesting you know what
i mean but like i went on a giant
spiritual quest thinking psychedelics
were given the answer and like one i
ended up an atheist and two
you know what i mean like like i don't
know what to tell you but like that was
my experience was that was it directly
the experience of suicide or sorry not
still assignment but psychedelics that
made you an atheist it was no i'm not
i'm really actually an agnostic um no it
was uh i don't um
first of all i really dislike
psychedelic culture i really like it
is it about the culture you don't like
so we talked about this in in stealing
fire a little bit this is true with flow
work this is one of the dangers so at
the flow research collective the only
swag we have is a t-shirt that says
never trust the dopamine
and um the reason is and a lot of these
drugs amplified dopamine is that
psychedelics and these experiences where
your ego vanishes with your selflessness
there's a rebound effect so the when
your ego comes back on it actually comes
on bigger and more ferocious and people
come back from psychedelics they have
visionary experiences and they think
they have
authority like some kind of spiritual
authority some kind of create like i
don't like i don't maybe you do but i
don't like i i'm not i don't think so i
think you're experiencing
well well documented meaning like
10 000 years of documentation um ego
inflation and a whole bunch of other
stuff and you know we tell at the flow
research collective i t we teach people
like literally if we put you into flows
if you can do a flow state don't go
shopping
pattern recognition is all turned up
everything looks good right don't uh and
but and by the way there's a lot of like
people in the self-help coaching world
who think it's perfectly fine to alter
people's consciousness and then try to
upsell them stuff and
i think it's criminal because when
you're in flow for example risk-taking
is up and long-term planning is down
right the flow is great for a lot of
stuff it's not great for long-term
planning have big dreams in flow verify
them in reality right like and this is
the same reason the burning man ticket
says don't make a life-changing decision
for six weeks until after the event
right now nearly six weeks after yeah i
think it's six weeks maybe it's four
weeks but like yeah they i mean they
flat out warn you like this is no
dangers this is not like you know what
like this is these this is because
people are having a breakthrough because
i would get while you are high
but six weeks is a long time so
people are having sort of false
epiphanies or what they're having false
epiphanies they're having like they're
falling in love with somebody who's not
their significant other that they meet
on the playa and they think
you know
that the peak experience
like you have to like if you're having a
peak experience that's astounding but
you got to sort of verify and validate
in the real world for a while i think
before you can really trust it this is i
teach my my staff this all the time and
i think this i this happens in the world
it makes me crazy the order is supposed
to be
insight
research
publication meaning like have other
smart people beat on your ideas then
communication right what we have right
now in psychedelic culture is insight
and communication and there's no
research and there's no i did the
research here's what i think i'm looking
at hey like here's my idea of smart
people beat on them for a while and let
me hone this and then let me stand on
stage and tell you it's true instead
like
people are going inside and then they're
jumping to whatever platform they can
and they're talking to you as if it's
true that's what i mean by when i say
don't like psychedelic culture that to
me is nonsense like just because you're
having a
crazy mystical experience
doesn't like doesn't mean you don't have
to still go out and validate it as truth
um using the same
we you know we have truth filters we
have there's a whole bunch of stuff in
our impossible here's how you evaluate
knowledge quickly right you're gonna
have to learn you're gonna have to
accelerate learning skills and you're
gonna need truth filters scientific
method is a truth filter investigative
journalism the way i was that those are
truth filters
uh elon musk's first principle thinking
that peter and i talk about in in bold
these are all how do i evaluate
information quickly and things like that
when when engineers want to know what
are the boundary conditions right what
are the limits
what they're saying is everything beyond
those limits is where the nonsense or
the breakthroughs are but it's either or
and you just gotta know right i'm not
saying don't learn the weird ass [__]
but know that this is the line and once
you step over this line
it's an open question go explore for
sure but like there's a line and like
you know i was a reporter who
specialized in the cutting edge and i
that was the hardest thing to always
figure out like where's the line in this
field where i'm not exactly an expert
right i'd go into like genetics and you
have to know well this is established
truth and this is somebody's wild idea
and it may be right it may be wrong but
like if you're going to publish it
you've got to know where the line is
just so you can describe it to most
people like hey this is what we know for
sure this stuff may or may not be true
you can make up your mind here's here's
the way to do that
um blah blah that i feel is responsible
and smart and i don't know
that answer your question at all or did
i just go off in some other no no you
did for sure and uh i think truth
filters is a great place to wrap up
steven as always man thank you so much
for spending the time with me the art of
impossible i really enjoyed it like i
said i there are precious few books that
so line up perfectly with what i have
experienced i forget who said it but
something along the lines of the
if the research doesn't validate what is
actually happening then there's a flaw
in the research so to see it line up
with things that i couldn't put the
eloquent words to it that you have or
and i certainly didn't have the science
behind it
but it's so lined up with what life
seems like to me um it was very very
eye-opening so
thank you as always for putting out
another amazing piece of work into the
world
and where can people learn more get the
book follow you whatever the case may be
yeah all that uh so the book
um the art of impossible.com
uh is is a place stephencottler.com
um is another and we talked about the
passion recipe so passion recipe
oneword.com
that's for everybody listening um as
well but the art of impossible.com um
is uh it was where you find it amazon
barnes and noble support your indies and
tom uh once
first of all it's an honor that i've
gotten to be on your show three times
thank you for the interest in the work
that i do and and thank you for the work
that you do in the world i appreciate it
man my pleasure
guys speaking of things that you will
appreciate if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you